other end of the spectrum is the encounter with life-threatening, traumatic
violence characterized by extreme fear, helplessness, or horror. This
experience is much more common than we might want to believe
(McFarlane & Girolamo, 1996; Yehuda, 2002). One study in the U.S.
found that that 60.3 percent of the men and 50.3 percent of the women in
the sample population had an experience that met the DSM-IV criteria
for a Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) stressor (McFarlane &
Girolamo, 1996).
Most people who survive traumatic experiences manage to go on
with their lives, but the experience does not lose its impact. It frequently
results in significant physical and psychological changes that can interfere with the daily life, relationships, and health of the person who suffered the trauma. When the person begins to experience his/her life
being organized around the traumatic experience, s/he moves beyond
the experience of temporary stress and enters the realm of Acute Stress
Disorder (ASD) or PTSD. At this point the internal psychological
dynamics begin to take on a life of their own and create a self-sustaining
dynamic that launches further biological and psychological changes,
with the person getting caught up in the “biopsychosocial trap” described by Shalev (1996). They find themselves trapped. The experience of trauma becomes like a “black hole” holding the entire life of the
victim in its field of gravity, bending and twisting beliefs, perceptions,
and relationships.
Traumatic events destroy the foundations of trust on which we construct our lives, our relationships, and the meaning that enables us to
transcend the present moment (Janoff-Bulman, 1992). These complex
events impact the physical, psychological, social and spiritual components of our lives. They are both natural (earthquake, hurricane, flood)
and human-made (war, criminal violence, physical, and sexual abuse)
catastrophes. Psychological trauma is a subjective experience, yet at the
same time it is the consequence of an objective, quantifiable incident.
This article examines the possibility of transforming trauma in a
manner that opens the individual to new possibilities, to the future.
Trauma compels us to go beyond the present devastation precisely because we are in pain, and yet, some individuals do not have the strength
to respond. Too often the victim is imprisoned in the embrace of the
traumatic event. Instead of finding themselves at the threshold of the
transcendent they discover that they have become enmeshed in the past,
in the pain and injustice of their suffering.
In The Moral Imagination: The Art and Soul of Building Peace, John
Paul Lederach (2005) discusses the possibility of generating creative
28 JOURNAL OF SPIRITUALITY IN MENTAL HEALTH
responses that are rooted in the challenges of the real world, and that are,
at the same time, capable of giving birth to that which does not yet exist.
In the contexts of war and genocide he searches for “moments pregnant
with new life, which rise from what appear to be the barren grounds of
destructive violence and relationships” (p. 29). He depicts decisions and
choices which begin to change the energy of an experience from one of
being trapped in a cycle of destruction and death to one of perceiving
things in a new way, discovering new possibilities. In this article I propose that the intrapersonal and interpersonal dynamics of forgiveness
carry the potential of initiating a point of transformation, an opening to
new possibilities and new life for the victim of severe trauma.
Psychological trauma is an extreme experience, a death experience.
It takes us to the limits of our physical existence. It takes us to that place
which none of us wants to go to; yet it is that place which we know that
we will all arrive at someday. Death is inevitably a part of life. It is only
by letting go of what we know, as Kegan (1982) and Wilber (2000) remind us, that we can be open to that which is beyond the present.
Trauma is a death to the way things are. It is a horrifying reality; yet, at
the same time, it holds the potential of opening us to the transcendent, to
that which is beyond the present. Though the trauma of death and
change is inevitable, and even though it is at times an opening to personal growth and to the transcendent, it should never be idealized or
sentimentalized. It is critical that from the very beginning we acknowledge the dreadfulness of violence and trauma. The wounds of trauma
are real. They never disappear. Those wounds can be healed, but one
never returns to the state in which s/he was before the injury.
The first step then in confronting the reality of trauma is to face the
seriousness of the pain and the struggle involved. Herman (1992) points
out that the temptation for both the victim and society is to deny and ignore the reality of trauma. One blames the victim for his/her suffering
and looks for reasons to justify that suffering (Ryan, 1976). The suffering of others, especially when it appears to be random, unjustified or
beyond our understanding, threatens all of us. It demands that we recognize that ultimately we are not in control, a very difficult response. The
first step in responding to trauma is to move beyond denial and dissociation, and to confront the truth of the situation even when that truth is
painful. Once someone is dragged into the black hole of trauma, the path
out is treacherous and obscure. The person overwhelmed by trauma
becomes disorientated, a prisoner of the horrible truth of the traumatic
experience. The victim is held captive by the lived reality, by their powerlessness to change that reality, and by the devastating pain and the
Raymond J. Finch 29
gaping wound that reality inflicts on them. The victim is also held captive
by the hate and the desire for vengeance, which is generated by the festering wound of trauma. The justified anger, directed at the perpetrator,
overflows and emanates in all directions, even as it turns back on the already injured self. When we speak of forgiveness it is critical to remember that forgiveness begins with a wound that the victim will carry for
the rest of their lives. “To lose sight of the wound, even for a minute, is
to sentimentalize the subject of forgiveness; for any person who is moving through a process of forgiveness has this wound as their constant
companion” (Henderson, 2003, p. 31). The process of constructing a
new world of meaning, the process of rebuilding the spiritual foundations of his/her life, can enable the victim to overcome the pull of
the traumatic event and to transform that event. Frequently this process
follows a path of spiritual development and includes a process of
forgiveness.
Forgiveness is a concept with a very long history, especially in religious, philosophical, and moral discourse (Rye et al., 2000). The term is
used with different meanings. The variety of understandings that exist
on a popular level adds to the general confusion and misunderstanding
that is so common (Enright & Fitzgibbons, 2000; Enright & North,
1998; Enright et al., 1992; McCullough, Pargament, & Thoresen, 2000;
North, 1998). Enright, Freedman, and Rique (1998) point out the importance of arriving at a common definition in order to facilitate the empirical study of forgiveness and to advance our understanding of how
forgiveness functions. They affirm that many of the differences of opinion about the therapeutic value of interpersonal forgiveness and its
appropriateness are in reality arguments which could be resolved by
constructing a common definition (Enright et al., 1992). Though the
challenge of creating a definition of forgiveness that is acceptable to all
therapists, researchers, and theorists remains, there are some clear and
generally accepted indications of what forgiveness is not. Before looking at the proposed definition it will be helpful to look at what can be
eliminated.
There is agreement that forgiveness is not the same as leniency for or
the legal pardon of the offender. Both pardoning and forgiving are expressions of undeserved mercy, but pardon involves the public arena of
the law, and forgiveness involves the personal arena of intrapersonal and
interpersonal processes. Enright et al. (1998) point out that forgiveness
does not imply impunity. It does not mean that the perpetrator should
go unpunished. Forgiveness belongs to the victim. It is not an objective
30 JOURNAL OF SPIRITUALITY IN MENTAL HEALTH
impersonal legal act, but rather it is a very personal, emotional act, which
is subjective from the beginning (Enright & Fitzgibbons, 2000).
Forgiving is not excusing or condoning the wrong that was committed. North points out that forgiveness is rooted in the recognition that a
wrong has been committed. She affirms that, “What is annulled in the
act of forgiveness is not the crime itself, but the distorting effect that this
wrong has upon one’s relation with the wrongdoer and perhaps with
others” (1998, pp. 17-18). The focus is not on the wrong, but on the interpersonal and intrapersonal dynamics of the situation. The focus is on
the psychological consequences for the victim and the consequences or
distortion in the relationships of the victim.
Forgiveness is not reconciliation. It does not imply that the wrongdoer and the victim will restore the interpersonal relationship that
existed previous to the injury. There are clearly situations such as domestic violence, sexual abuse, torture, et cetera where the victim must
be protected and reconciliation is simply not a part of the equation.
There are also situations where the perpetrator is unknown or dead. If
forgiveness implied reconciliation, the restoration of the relationship,
the victim would be held captive by the situation (Enright & Fitzgibbons,
2000; Enright et al., 1998). Reconciliation is one step beyond forgiveness. It is not contradictory to forgiveness, but it is not necessarily an
outcome of the forgiveness process (Enright & Fitzgibbons, 2000;
Enright et al., 1998; Affinito, 2002).
Forgiveness is not forgetting. An important part of the forgiveness
process is remembering what needs to be forgiven. It is only when there
is conscious awareness and sufficient memory that forgiveness can take
place. Enright and Fitzgibbons (2000) affirm that forgiving is actually
“remembering in a new way” (p. 44). The process of forgiving changes
our awareness of the hurt. It actually brings the wound more clearly into
consciousness, ultimately reframing our perceptions, allowing us to
integrate the memory. The wounds of trauma do not disappear, they are
transformed.
Forgiveness is not appeasing the perpetrator. It is not conciliation to
gain another’s favor or to manipulate the perpetrator. There are times
when a victim might identify with or even try to unite with the perpetrator however, this is not forgiveness. This seems to happen most frequently in cases when the victimization occurs over time and there is no
possibility of escape. The case of Patricia Hearst is a famous example of
this phenomenon which some have named the Stockholm Syndrome. It
is also unfortunately all too frequent that the victim becomes a perpetrator. In identifying with the wrongdoer the victim repeats the cycle of
Raymond J. Finch 31
violence, inflicting trauma on another. It is all too common for someone
who was abused to abuse another, and for someone who is the victim of
oppression or racism to inflict the same injury on a less powerful person
(Herman, 1992; van der Kolk & McFarlane, 1996). Forgiveness entails
a clear awareness of the wrong that has been done and a clear differentiation between the person of the perpetrator and the injurious act of that
person (Enright et al., 1998).
Forgiveness is not weakness. It is not false self-sacrificing which
denies the justice of the cause of the victim. It is not a giving up of selfrespect and the belief that one has the right to be treated with respect.
Enright et al. (1998) point out that in forgiving, the victim needs to be
aware that s/he has been injured, that his/her rights or person has been
trampled on. It is this awareness that makes forgiveness possible. If the
victim is not aware of the abuse s/he would not be in a position to forgive. Frequently the first aspect of forgiveness work is to get in contact
with the depths of the wound that was inflicted by the wrongdoer
(Enright et al.).
Forgiveness is not accepting things as they are in a passive manner,
rather it is active and it enables the victim to regain the sense of control
over his/her life and emotions that frequently has been taken away by
the perpetrator (Enright et al., 1998). Forgiveness is not the same as
gaining power or superiority over the perpetrator. It does not hold the
offender in the debt of the person offended (Enright & Fitzgibbons,
2000). Finally, forgiveness is not self-centered. It is not something that
a person does simply to feel better, to promote healing, or to let go
of the hurt. It is a free gift that is consciously and actively given to benefit the offender; which at the same time has benefits which rebound
upon the victim (Enright et al.; Enright & Fitzgibbons).
Enright et al. describe interpersonal forgiveness as “a willingness to
abandon one’s right to resentment, negative judgment, and indifferent
behavior toward one who unjustly injured us, while fostering the undeserved qualities of compassion, generosity, and even love toward him or
her” (1998, pp. 46-47). This definition of interpersonal forgiveness
assumes that the injured person has suffered an unjust hurt at the hands
of another. It assumes that the injury is the result of the actions of another person, and not of the forces of nature. According to this definition, interpersonal forgiveness must involve two actors, the victim, and
the perpetrator (Enright et al., 1998; Ransley, 2004). It presupposes that
the injured person freely chooses to forgive on cognitive, affective, and
behavioral levels. Exline and Baumeister (2000) agree with this definition while specifying that forgiving involves one party canceling the
32 JOURNAL OF SPIRITUALITY IN MENTAL HEALTH
interpersonal debt that is incurred when one person harms or wrongs
another.
Enright et al. (1998; Enright, 1996) affirm that forgiving is a decision, that it happens over time, and that it must be processed on cognitive, behavioral and affective levels. They insist that although the victim
might arrive at a moment of decision, the process itself is long and arduous. The more hurtful the wound resulting from the injury or trauma the
more difficult and protracted the process of forgiving becomes. First
there is the struggle to choose to forgive; then there is the process of living out that option which involves many additional choices. With time
there is behavior change concurrent with changes in the affective tone
of the victim. S/he might move from ignoring, to visiting, and to helping
the perpetrator, from feeling anger to understanding and compassion for
the “enemy.”
Forgiving is the prerogative of the person offended, therefore not
obligatory. The definition presupposes that forgiving is not the result of
moral, psychological, or religious pressure, nor is it dependent on
the repentance of the offender (Enright et al., 1998). Forgiveness is the
free choice of the victim. Andrews (2000) argues from another perspective that forgiving is a social act, and as such forgiveness must go beyond the intrapsychic process proposed by Enright et al. She believes
that the perpetrator must admit doing wrong and ask for forgiveness if
the requirements of both justice and mercy are to be realized. Andrews
utilized a negotiated model of forgiveness which places conditions on
forgiving; at the same time, Enright et al. propose a unilateral model
which places forgiveness totally in the hands of the victim. The difference between these two models holds important implications for questions of impunity involving society’s need to punish perpetrators. The
difference also contains important considerations for the healing and
the moral good of the victim. Though the concept of forgiveness presented by Enright et al. and the concept presented by Andrews appear to
be contradictory, Exline and Baumeister (2000) point out that forgiveness can be examined from both a personal and a social perspective.
They insist that it is both an intrapsychic and an interpersonal process.
They affirm that the perspective and level of analysis will determine the
appropriate model in a particular situation. The challenge is to be able to
hold the complexity of forgiveness in a concept or definition. Trauma is
many faceted, and so too is forgiveness. It is both intimately personal
and profoundly social. The complexity of forgiveness is equal to the
complexity and profundity of the wound that occasions the need for a
forgiveness process.
Raymond J. Finch 33
Forgiving is a moral act which focuses on the relationship between
the offender and the injured party. It hopes to transform the actors as
well as the relationship. It moves the relationship in a new direction
from destruction and hurt toward healing and hope (Enright, 1996;
Enright et al., 1998; Enright & Fitzgibbons, 2000; Ransley, 2004). Forgiving is essentially a quest for the good, both for the good of the perpetrator and the victim. It is more than simply moving on or letting go. It
is more than a self-help technique. It is above all a moral value, something that we do for ourselves, but which at the same time is something
that is freely given to the offender (Enright, 1996; Enright et al., 1998;
Enright & Fitzgibbons, 2000). In this article I examine forgiveness both
as a moral action and as a therapeutic intervention, which intends to
enable the victim to move forward in a process of healing.
Forgiveness is both a moral action and religious prescription but, is
interpersonal forgiveness always an appropriate and ethical choice that
a counselor should promote?1 Is forgiveness the path to new meaning
and new life even when the injury has been traumatic to the point of
shattering the victim’s basic assumptions and identity?
It is in religious discourse that interpersonal forgiving comes closest
to being considered a universal prescription. Martin Marty refers to
interpersonal forgiveness as a part of the “ethos” of Christianity. He understands it as an intimate part of the character, fabric, and identity of
Christianity (Marty, 1998). Elliot Dorff (1998) who speaks out of the
Jewish tradition understands interpersonal forgiveness as a duty of the
person offended when the perpetrator admits guilt and begins the journey back to righteousness. At the same time there are limits to forgiveness even in religious discourse. Marty reminds us of Dietrich
Bonhoeffer’s concern about easy forgiveness and “cheap grace,” and
Dorff points out that some sins and crimes are considered unforgivable
in the Jewish Tradition. The Jewish and Christian scriptures are replete
with admonitions about God’s forgiving nature and instructions to
forgive as we have been forgiven. At the same time forgiveness and
mercy are tempered by God’s sense of justice (Ex. 34: 6-7), and the obligation to forgive is modified by the sinner’s lack of repentance and the
offended person’s need to defend themselves and the community (Matt.
18: 15-17).
There is much enthusiasm about the power and efficacy of interpersonal forgiveness, both for the healing of the survivor and the potential
that it has for breaking the cycle of hurt, violence, and abuse. At the
same time it is clear that the moral basis of the decision to promote interpersonal forgiving and any requirement to forgive are the product of a
34 JOURNAL OF SPIRITUALITY IN MENTAL HEALTH
specific context, in particular, the situation of the injured party. The theorists agree that there are clearly times when interpersonal forgiving is
not appropriate and when it could be considered morally wrong and ethically doubtful (Murphy, 2002; Holmgren, 2002; Enright & Fitzgibbons,
2000; Safer, 1999) but; they disagree on the criteria which should be
included in this decision.
The ethical considerations involved in the decision to promote interpersonal forgiveness are influenced by the context of each client and
situation, there is no universal prescription to forgive at all times. Therefore, it would be helpful to consider moral and ethical guidelines
that might direct this decision-making process. A first important guiding principle is that forgiving must be the free choice of the injured person. Forgiveness belongs to the offended party and to no one else.
Enright et al. (1992, p. 96) point out that, “a client should never be cajoled into forgiving. Because forgiveness is a supererogatory act it
must be freely given.” Given the clinical evidence, which demonstrates
the healing power of interpersonal forgiveness (Enright & Fitzgibbons,
2000; Worthington, 1998; McCullough, Exline, & Baumeister, 1998), it
would certainly be indicated that a counselor explain the successful use
of interpersonal forgiveness as a therapeutic intervention. At the same
time, forgiving must be the decision of the victim (Holmgren, 2002).
This is particularly important in instances of severe trauma such as sexual abuse, rape, incest, or violent assault provoked by either political or
criminal motives. In these cases the trauma experienced is marked by
loss of control and safety. The first step in helping the injured person
deal with his/her hurt is to establish conditions of safety and to enable
him/her to begin to resume control and to be aware of resuming that
control over their lives (Herman, 1992). An intervention, even one
which only appears to push the survivor into a particular therapy, risks
victimizing the person again. The first guiding principle is that forgiving must always be a free decision from the beginning to the end of the process (Enright & Fitzgibbons, 2000; Murphy, 2002; Holmgren, 2002).
Another important consideration is the effect that forgiving has on
the self-esteem of the injured party and his/her sense of empowerment.
The anger and resentment that forgiving would dissipate are not entirely
negative. Anger and resentment frequently are signs of good self-esteem
and self-respect. Forgiving too quickly might be a sign of low self-esteem
and servility. Recognizing the wrong and the unjust pain are an important part of the model proposed by Enright and his colleagues (Enright
et al., 1998; Enright & Fitzgibbons, 2000). It is important that this step
not be rushed. When an injured person makes a free choice to forgive,
Raymond J. Finch 35
and s/he does that in such a manner that empowers him/her in his/her
relationship with the perpetrator, then it is clear that forgiving is an effective choice. Care must be taken that the process of forgiving not
appear to trivialize the hurt nor the extent of the injustice which occurred. If that were to take place, it could become an occasion to victimize the injured party a second time. When forgiveness therapy is utilized
in an effective and ethical manner, it will recognize and confirm the
extent of the injustice and hurt. It will never minimize the injustice or
pain involved for the injured party (Enright & Fitzgibbons, 2000;
Murphy, 2002).
Resentment and anger can be a powerful force that enables the injured party to avoid further injury. Is it ethical and in the interest of
the client to remove this motivation? Some argue that forgiving could
lead to reconciliation and continued victimization of the injured party.
This is an especially important consideration in the case of domestic violence and “battered wives.” As mentioned earlier, reconciliation is not
necessarily a goal of forgiveness, but rather the goal is to enable a new
intrapsychic relationship to be structured within the victim. This will
have consequences for the interpersonal relationship between the victim and the perpetrator, but it will not necessarily result in reconciliation. There are clearly situations where reconciliation is either
impossible or not recommended. It must be very clear that forgiving is
not, by any means, a recommendation that the victim return to the
situation or relationship where s/he was hurt (Enright & Fitzgibbons,
2000; Murphy, 2002).
Up to this point we have looked at important personal considerations
involved with utilizing interpersonal forgiveness as a therapeutic intervention. One must also remember that there are important questions
about interpersonal forgiving that involve the good of society, which is
intertwined with the good of the individual. What are the consequences
of forgiving for society? Might forgiving the perpetrator of a violent
crime somehow encourage other violent criminals? Might forgiving the
actual perpetrators and the intellectual authors of torture encourage the
future use of coercion and actually result in further injury to society?
Is interpersonal forgiveness an appropriate response when confronting
the violence produced by situations of racism, sexism, oppression, and
terrorism? Does the impunity of political and military leaders actually
contribute to the breakdown of the moral fiber of a society?
The women’s movement demonstrated that the personal is political.
The promotion and utilization of interpersonal forgiving as a therapeutic intervention on an individual level will inevitably have political
36 JOURNAL OF SPIRITUALITY IN MENTAL HEALTH
consequences. It is critical that these consequences be considered and that
any possible negative result be taken into account. Forgiving a rapist, a
child abuser, a criminal, a murder, or a torturer is a personal choice and at
the same time it is a personal choice that carries real practical and political
consequences. It must be clear that forgiving the person does not pardon
or excuse the crime. In fact, it must be remembered that forgiving does
not in any way mitigate the social requirement of justice and the prevention of future offenses.
The personal and the political are inseparably interwoven. The moral
fabric of a society is woven with every interpersonal and social encounter as well as through the establishment of the laws and customs of that
society. I believe that the eruption of interest in and the investigation
of forgiveness are important. Forgiveness offers promise as a valuable
therapeutic tool on the intrapersonal, interpersonal, and the social levels.
Yes there are cautions. It is not the panacea that some would proclaim it
to be, and yet, at the same time, it embodies the religious wisdom of millennia and it enables us to take that wisdom into account and to utilize
it in a new way for the common good on both the individual and social
planes.
The history of the study of trauma clearly indicates social dynamics
of denial and dissociation. The dynamics of denial blocked out society’s
and even science’s awareness of the prevalence of trauma. It obscured
the recognition of the connection between hysteria and abuse in the context of the family. It blinded researchers and therapists to the enormity
of the reality of sexual abuse, especially rape, and the seriousness of the
consequences of this abuse. The same inability to confront the truth was
at play for decades in the context of societies at war, which encouraged
the denial of the reality of trauma among combatants. It was difficult to
accept the reality that not only “moral invalids” (Herman, 1992, p. 21)
succumbed to the violence of the battlefield.
Have we learned from history or are we fated to repeat the errors of
the past in a new context? From what truths do the dynamics of denial
and dissociation protect us today? For example, is it possible today
to speak of a just war when over 90 percent of the casualties are civilians
(Summerfield, 1995)? Have we allowed an awareness of that statistic
to sink into our consciousness? Just as our predecessors were blinded
by their social context, presuppositions and defenses, we too are constrained by our context and our defenses. In order to accompany those
caught up in the dynamics of trauma we must be open to facing our own
fears and aversions, otherwise our defenses will not permit us to perceive and empathize with the real suffering of the victims. Just as the
Raymond J. Finch 37
first step for the victim is confronting the truth of their wounds, the first
step for those who would accompany the victims of trauma and society
is also to face the difficult truth of trauma. If we would see the wounds of
those who are torn apart by the violence of abuse, greed, and inequality,
then we must face our fears as individuals and as a society. We must confront the fear that it could have been us rather than them. We must
confront the fear that we are capable of the violence that we so strongly
condemn. We must confront the fear that there might not be any light at
the end of the tunnel that perhaps there is nothing more than what has already been lost.
The challenge of confronting our fears and pain is exacerbated by insecurity and isolation. In working with the victims of trauma and in
creating programs to promote resiliency in the face of trauma, it is important to create spaces of safety and connection. In the world of the
“middle class” safe space is frequently found in the therapeutic relationship but in reality only a minority of the population has the possibility of
therapy. Creating spaces of safety and connection where pain and fears
can be confronted and integrated into the lives of the victims involves
strengthening and supporting the instances of community already present such as grassroots community organizations, parish groups, school
groups, and neighborhood groups. It might also entail the encouragement and creation of novel and innovative groups especially among the
poor in urban areas where many of the traditional community structures
have been destroyed in the process of migration. The challenge is to encourage structures that promote connection and relationship in civilizations that are rapidly being transformed from traditional, communal,
agricultural societies into modern, urban, industrial cultures. This process
of transformation aggravates the isolation, mutual suspicion, anxiety,
and hyperarousal, which are hallmarks of the wounds that violence and
trauma inflict on individual victims and societies.
The creation and support of safe spaces on the levels of the community, and the family, as well as the construction and nourishment of
inner psychic space where the person can be in touch with his/her cultural, social and personal identity, and meanings is important, but it is
not an end in itself. It is simply a means to enable the survivor of trauma
and violence to integrate the trauma into his/her life narrative. It is a
means to enable the survivor to examine the connections and meanings,
which sustained them in the past and to let go of that, which has been fatally compromised. It is a means of accompanying the survivor as s/he
discovers and elaborates new meanings and new relationships. The safe
social and interior spaces make it possible for the survivor to remember
38 JOURNAL OF SPIRITUALITY IN MENTAL HEALTH
their history, their relationships, their identity, their spirituality, and their
trauma in a new way. The trauma and violence can never be erased. The
victim cannot go back to the past. But, if the survivor manages to free
him/herself from the past, there is the possibility of new life and in a very
real sense a new creation.
Trauma provides the opportunity, indeed the necessity, to reconnect
with the transcendent. It offers the motivation to reexamine the fundamental presuppositions, the meaning, that sustains our world, our relationships, and our identity (Janoff-Bulman, 1992). The spiritual dimension
of trauma is clear. Healing must take place on the physical and psychological levels and it is imperative that healing extends to the level of spirituality, that dimension which integrates the physical, the psychological
and the social. It is on this plane, the transcendent, that the potential of
new creation is to be discovered. I am not advocating any particular way of
creating meaning, any particular spirituality. I believe the issue is being
in touch with the transcendent in a manner that is most suitable for the
survivor. That will mean that it will be in continuity with the survivor’s
history, with his/her culture, religion or lack of religion, and sense of the
sacred. There must be continuity and at the same time there will be new
dimensions that will enable the survivor to create presuppositions, meanings and relationships that both encompass the old and go beyond past
experience. This entails creativity, both in utilizing traditional cultural
expressions and rituals, and at the same time creating new expressions
and rituals. It involves a respect for the cultural roots expressed in beliefs and traditions, as well as openness to the transcendent.
Trauma is a multifaceted reality, which provokes a complex response
on the part of the survivor. One important aspect of that response is
the destruction of relationships. Trauma isolates the victim, cutting
him/her off from family, friends, community, and even from him/herself.
The “biopsychosocial” trap sets up patterns of relating that become selfdefeating and self-perpetuating. These patterns function on intrapersonal, interpersonal, and wider social-cultural levels. They reinforce
each other resulting in a continuous feedback chain that can spiral
downward. The act of forgiving has the potential of breaking the feedback chain. The forgiveness triad brings a new element, a new force,
to the existing patterns of interaction. It carries the potential of transforming the energy from one that causes death to one that stimulates
new life both in personal and social contexts.
Forgiveness is not a panacea. But, it does offer an effective tool, which
can enable the survivor to diminish and eventually eliminate the distortions that the trauma produces in their intrapsychic and interpersonal
Raymond J. Finch 39
relationships. It is by no means the first intervention in a healing process
and it is not always appropriate or effective. The cautions and warnings
presented by both the advocates of forgiveness therapy and its critics
must be carefully considered. When those considerations are taken into
account the new elements introduced by the dynamics of forgiveness
have the potential of breaking the cycle of violence on all levels. If the
cautions are disregarded there is a high probability of retraumatizing the
victim and reopening or deepening the wounds inflicted by the original
trauma. Forgiving is difficult work, requiring will and effort. The benefit
is the potential to bring about a new situation, a new reality, for the survivor, the perpetrator, and for society.
Forgiveness is at the same time a therapeutic intervention and a spiritual, moral choice. These qualities cannot be artificially distilled from
each other. If we attempt to examine forgiveness simply as a therapeutic
intervention devoid of spiritual significance, it vanishes before our eyes
and we find that we are examining something quite different than forgiveness. It is clear that forgiveness is a choice that has spiritual significance and power. It is choice that should not be proposed or made
lightly. If forgiveness is imposed, or if it is inappropriately manipulated,
it has the potential to nourish the spiral of violence and destruction,
bringing us to yet another dead end. At the same time, it is a powerful
choice that can create new life, enabling us to take one more step in
bringing about a new creation

H e l l o ,   W o r l  d  !
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12

H L O O L